Marc Sabatella's Jazz Improvisation Primer: Breaking The Rules


Charles Ives was a composer who wrote music that was considered avant garde
in its day.  His father is rumored to have taught him, "you must learn the
rules first so that you will know how to break them".  This is especially
true in music like jazz, where you are constantly expected to be creative.
Following the rules all the time would lead to predictable and boring
music.  Paying no attention whatsoever to the rules could easily lead to
music that was ultimately boring in its randomness.

There are many rules and conventions that have been presented here.  There
are no criminal penalties associated with breaking any of them, however.
You should experiment as much as possible to find new ways of doing things.
The rules of harmony presented here form a framework, but it is not a rigid
one.  I have already suggested that the manner in which you utilize these
rules will shape how you sound.  How you break the rules will similarly
help define your own style.  Experimenting with the rules of harmony is
just the beginning of individuality, however.  Look for other
non-traditional ways to express yourself.  Try hitting the piano keys with
your fist.  Try overblowing your saxophone.  Try removing the first valve
slide on your trumpet.  There are an infinite number of possible things you
can do with your instrument.

Also,  expand  your  listening  to  include other types of music such as
classical or reggae, and see if you can learn from them and apply  those
lessons to whatever you play.  It is severely limiting to think that all
jazz music should consist of 32 bar songs,  walking  bass  lines,  swing
ride  cymbal  patterns,  and  head-solos-head forms.  The world does not
beat in four-four time.

